docs: Algorand scheme spec proposal (#1)
algorandfoundation/x402: specs/schemes/exact/scheme_exact_algo.md

# Scheme: `exact` on `Algorand`

## Summary

> The `exact` scheme on Algorand uses the `Algorand Standard Asset (ASA)`, which are native assets (no contract required) on the Algorand blockchain to authorize a transfer of a specific amount from the payer to the resource server. The approach results in the facilitator having no ability to direct funds anywhere but the address specified by the resource server in `paymentRequirements`.

Reviewer: In the following text we say:

> A group can have transactions of different types, such as `pay` (payment) and `axfer` (asset transfer).

But here in the summary we just talk about ASA, we should include ALGO as well.

Author: In x402, they specifically target it for stablecoins. Not sure if ALGO itself for payments would be an attractive option for a merchant or even for coinbase to support it directly.

## Payment Requirements asset definition 

> In the `exact` scheme on Algorand, the `paymentRequirements.asset` must be a string representing an `Algorand Standard Asset (ASA)` ID unsigned integer instead of an `ERC20` contract address. This **MUST** be validated by the resource server to ensure the `asset` field is valid when using the Algorand scheme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `exact` scheme on Algorand, the `paymentRequirements.asset` **MUST** be a string representing an `Algorand Standard Asset (ASA)` ID unsigned integer instead of an `ERC20` contract address. This **MUST** be validated by the resource server to ensure the `asset` field is valid when using the Algorand scheme.
```

Reviewer: For consistency

> In the `exact` scheme on Algorand, the `paymentRequirements.asset` must be a string representing an `Algorand Standard Asset (ASA)` ID unsigned integer instead of an `ERC20` contract address. This **MUST** be validated by the resource server to ensure the `asset` field is valid when using the Algorand scheme.

Reviewer: What about ALGO? That is not an ASA ID.

Author: x402 is for stablecoins only afaik, it excludes "gas" tokens. If needed we can make algo == 0?

## `X-Payment` header payload

> The `payload` field of the `X-PAYMENT` header must contain `paymentGroup` as a field. It represents an atomic group of transactions as an array. This is natively supported by Algorand and does not require contracts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `payload` field of the `X-PAYMENT` header **MUST** contain `paymentGroup` as a field. It represents an atomic group of transactions as an array. This is natively supported by Algorand and does not require contracts.
```

Reviewer: For consistency

> A group can have transactions of different types, such as `pay` (payment) and `axfer` (asset transfer). 

Reviewer: Just a sanity check: Are we excluding other transaction types on purpose? Or should they be supported as part of the group? What if we have an asset freeze in the same group to comply with KYC requirements? Or an App Call?

Author: We are not excluding other types, will add a comment explaining

Example:

```json
{
  "paymentGroup": [
    {
      "signature": "wVGxbZwPd2c8zKX4RSE4muFRBOHe/nRq5VT6iMeMksi2agfOCTs+VzOGUPJ+bTT5T21EuYjoBKKDX2+/NZG8Cg==",
      "txn": {
        "gen": "mainnet-v1.0",
        "gh": "SGO1GKSzyE7IEPItTxCByw9x8FmnrCDexi9/cOUJOiI=",
        "asnd": "PPNHVQJGE6ZMEWPR35UHLUYMCCZV6VNTHLJMZDVCONXKUPV47K4WGQJWGI",
        "arcv": "ACTSMNPJPS5JMZJJ5G73JOXUUMWXXDGS7TMOER3M4W7BC54ERSZ4KPSMHM",
        "type": "axfer",
        "fee": "0",
        "fv": "6631154",
        "lv": "6632154",
        "xaid": "168103"
      }
    },
    {
      "signature": "6iYMGg8cMw0VYYCfmwru8lixfrVyi1LFXm9H/M0MGf0P4vjK6KGsiCUvsocWUvMo8yTMWQ0hFcP86sRoyGlIAg==",
      "txn": {
        "gen": "mainnet-v1.0",
        "gh": "SGO1GKSzyE7IEPItTxCByw9x8FmnrCDexi9/cOUJOiI=",
        "fee": "2000",
        "fv": "6631154",
        "lv": "6632154",
        "snd": "LOXIQKHRCEDEMN5MKBQ32Y54J7H6JKBTEURQL4S65K44MTWN6UMTU2WNBM",
        "rcv": "LOXIQKHRCEDEMN5MKBQ32Y54J7H6JKBTEURQL4S65K44MTWN6UMTU2WNBM",
        "amnt": "0",
        "type": "pay"
      }
    }
  ]
}

> ```

Reviewer: I think the group (`grp`) field is missing in this example. Also, what if we have a single transaction? Should we skip the group (`grp`) field in that case?

Author: Right. good catch. will add

Author: @cusma as discussed, we accept the facilitator, which would be our implementation, would calculate this and attach it to the group? Okay with this?

## Signature Scheme

> Each transaction in the `paymentGroup` must be signed individually by each of the owners of the sender addresses in the group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each transaction in the `paymentGroup` **MUST** be signed individually by each of the owners of the sender addresses in the group.
```

Reviewer: For consistency

In Algorand, signatures are based on the `Ed25519` signature scheme. The `signature` field in the `X-PAYMENT` header payload is a base64 encoded string of the signed transaction.

### Algorand Addresses and Public Key relationship

In Algorand, addresses are 58-character base32-encoded representations of public keys, with a sha512_256 checksum (last 4 bytes) appended as a suffix. This encoding ensures that addresses can be derived directly from public keys without requiring a pre-existing signature for operations like `ecRecover` to verify signatures.

#### Example of encoding Algorand addresses:

```ts
	encodeAddress(publicKey: Buffer): string {
		const keyHash: string = sha512_256.create().update(publicKey).hex()

		// last 4 bytes of the hash
		const checksum: string = keyHash.slice(-8)

		return base32.encode(Encoder.ConcatArrays(publicKey, Buffer.from(checksum, "hex"))).slice(0, 58)
	}
```

### Encoding

#### Types

> Before encoding, all `txn` parameters must be converted into primitive types:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before encoding, all `txn` parameters **MUST** be converted into primitive types:
```

- `gh`: The genesis hash of the network, which is a base64 encoded string should be decoded. 
- `snd`: The sender address should be decoded into its public key bytes.
- `rcv`: The receiver address should be decoded into it's public key bytes.
- `xaid`: The asset ID should be converted into a uint64 integer.
- `aamnt`: The amount to transfer should be converted into a uint64 integer.
- `fee`: The fee for the transaction should be converted into a uint64 integer.
- `fv`: The first valid round should be converted into a uint64 integer.

> - `lv`: The last valid round should be converted into a uint64 integer.

Reviewer: What about the other fields:

- `type` (e.g., `pay`, `axfer`, etc.)
- `lx`, why might support leased transactions? This is a good feature to avoid transaction replay-ability
- `grp`, needed if we support groups
- `rekey`, this is very Algorand specific, but can’t we include it?
- `note`, 1k of arbitrary data as a notefield

Reviewer: What about type-specific fields (e.g., for payment, asset transfer, asset freeze, etc.).

Author: We need to discuss if we should allow for everything in the context of x402.

Author: @cusma can we do another pass? The spec now expects a group which might include any tx type

#### Scheme

> Algorand uses [**msgpack**](https://www.npmjs.com/package/algo-msgpack-with-bigint) to encode the transaction before signing.

Reviewer 2: Should we be linking the npm package that's owned by Algorand instead?
https://www.npmjs.com/package/algorand-msgpack

Author: @nullun definitely. Great point.

Author: updated

#### Steps to sign

- Decode the `txn` parameters as described above.
- Sort fields alphabetically. 
- Encode the sorted fields using msgpack.
- Add a prefix `TX` in its byte representation to the encoded message.

> - Sign the resulting byte array using the sender's private key with the `Ed25519` signature scheme.

Reviewer 3: Missing step? Figure out which txns you need to sign - the delegated fee example would require the user to only sign their part. I think this is a generic example but we can list is an optional step 
`- In case it is a group transaction, inspect `sender` to determine if a signature is required`

Author: Ah yeah. This was a leftover when i had only `asset-transfer` . Good catch

## Full `X-PAYMENT` header:

```json
{
  "x402Version": 1,
  "scheme": "exact",
  "network": "algorand-mainnet",
  "payload": {

>     "paymentGroup": [

Reviewer 3: Should be add a field to specify the payment transaction index?

Author: Added `PaymentTxID`

          "rcv": "LOXIQKHRCEDEMN5MKBQ32Y54J7H6JKBTEURQL4S65K44MTWN6UMTU2WNBM",
          "amnt": "0",
          "type": "pay"
        }
      },
      {
        "signature": "wVGxbZwPd2c8zKX4RSE4muFRBOHe/nRq5VT6iMeMksi2agfOCTs+VzOGUPJ+bTT5T21EuYjoBKKDX2+/NZG8Cg==",
        "txn": {
          "gen": "mainnet-v1.0",
          "gh": "SGO1GKSzyE7IEPItTxCByw9x8FmnrCDexi9/cOUJOiI=",
          "asnd": "PPNHVQJGE6ZMEWPR35UHLUYMCCZV6VNTHLJMZDVCONXKUPV47K4WGQJWGI",
          "arcv": "ACTSMNPJPS5JMZJJ5G73JOXUUMWXXDGS7TMOER3M4W7BC54ERSZ4KPSMHM",
          "type": "axfer",
          "fee": "0",
          "fv": "6631154",
          "lv": "6632154",
          "xaid": "168103"
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Verification

Steps to verify a payment for the `exact` scheme on Algorand:

1. Verify the signature is valid for each transaction in the `paymentGroup`.
  a. Encode the `txn` parameters as described in the encoding section.
  b. Recover the public key of the sender from the `snd` or `asnd` field by decoding from the address.
  c. Verify the signature against the encoded message using the recovered public key.

> 2. Verify that the atomic group of transactions is valid and can be executed as a single unit.

Reviewer 2: In the "`X-Payment` header payload" section above, it mentions the `paymentGroup` represents an atomic group. Does this mean it **MUST** be an atomic group? The examples don't appear to have a `grp` field, so I thought it might be optional, until now where it says to verify the atomic group can be executed together. Should we explain _how_ to do this? (e.g. hash of txids, although it's a little more complex than that)

Author: @nullun the coinbase x402 spec revolves around EIP-3009  which wraps ERC-20 tokens and gives the users fee delegation for payments and being wrapped in atomic groups. To align with that, i think Algorand should just offer x402 payments to be in groups so that we align with that. 

We should explain as much as possible, we shouldn't expect coinbase to be fully familiar with Algorand's nuances. 

Good call on the group id missing. But let me know if you want to make that contribution or others. Maybe you can improve the examples or descriptions.

# Scheme: `exact` on `Algorand`

## Summary

> The `exact` scheme on Algorand uses the `Algorand Standard Asset (ASA)`, which are native assets (no contract required) on the Algorand blockchain to authorize a transfer of a specific amount from the payer to the resource server. The approach results in the facilitator having no ability to direct funds anywhere but the address specified by the resource server in `paymentRequirements`.

Reviewer: Are we excluding ALGO payments (other than ASA)?

## Payment Requirements asset definition 

> In the `exact` scheme on Algorand, the `paymentRequirements.asset` **MUST** be a string representing an `Algorand Standard Asset (ASA)` ID unsigned integer instead of an `ERC20` contract address. This **MUST** be validated by the resource server to ensure the `asset` field is valid when using the Algorand scheme.

Reviewer: Are we excluding ALGO payments?

> ## `X-Payment` header payload

Reviewer: In my opinion, we must include a unique reference to the requested payment in the transaction, resolving the payment. Example: if I'm buying a book from the online store, then the payment is related to a specific purchase associated with a payment ID, which should be included in the payment note field.

Author: I've added `paymentTxID` on the payload.

Reviewer: I was referring to a x402 ID, IIUC the `paymentTxID` is the Algorand transaction ID.

Author: On the Whitepaper they explain that's part of the payment requirements response when you hit 402, it's part of the 402 protocol itself and not something we need to spec. I assume when we reply to 402 with the payment params, we include the payment ID. It's actually only mentioned once in the whitepaper and not part of the struct defined in the README. 

It's something we can clarify during the PR with coinbase and go from there

As part of the payload there **MUST** also be a `paymentTxID` field which identifies the transaction in the group that will pay the resource server. The group may perform several operations to facilitate the payment, such as swaps or asset transfers, but only one transaction in the group will actually transfer the funds to the resource server.

There can be multiple signers in the group and fees can be pooled together or assigned to a specific signer; meaning it can be delegated to a specific account to pay the fees for the group. A max of 16 transactions can be included in a group.

Example:

```json
{
  "paymentTxID": "R4PFEBJGLXV4PDOIBLY7UKBLVLXFCPYLXGBILC22BAVILTKWV3TA", // ID of the transaction in the group that wll pay the resource server
  "paymentGroup": [
    {
      "signature": "wVGxbZwPd2c8zKX4RSE4muFRBOHe/nRq5VT6iMeMksi2agfOCTs+VzOGUPJ+bTT5T21EuYjoBKKDX2+/NZG8Cg==",
      "txn": {
        "gen": "mainnet-v1.0",
        "grp": "abcd1234efgh5678ijkl9012mnop3456qrst7890uvwx1234yzab5678cdef9012",
        "gh": "SGO1GKSzyE7IEPItTxCByw9x8FmnrCDexi9/cOUJOiI=",

>         "asnd": "PPNHVQJGE6ZMEWPR35UHLUYMCCZV6VNTHLJMZDVCONXKUPV47K4WGQJWGI",

Reviewer: We need a `snd` field here to be specified. We don't really care about the `asnd` unless it is different from `snd`, but in that case, this transaction would be a "clawback" (which we might be used to "forced" payments and other exotic stuff).

        "arcv": "ACTSMNPJPS5JMZJJ5G73JOXUUMWXXDGS7TMOER3M4W7BC54ERSZ4KPSMHM",
        "type": "axfer",
        "fee": "0",
        "fv": "6631154",
        "lv": "6632154",

>         "xaid": "168103"

Reviewer: We should add the `"aamt"` field here.

>         "xaid": "168103"

Reviewer: Let's use a real ASA ID here, I'd say `31566704` (USDC).

      }
    },
    {
      "signature": "6iYMGg8cMw0VYYCfmwru8lixfrVyi1LFXm9H/M0MGf0P4vjK6KGsiCUvsocWUvMo8yTMWQ0hFcP86sRoyGlIAg==",
      "txn": {
        "gen": "mainnet-v1.0",
        "grp": "abcd1234efgh5678ijkl9012mnop3456qrst7890uvwx1234yzab5678cdef9012",
        "gh": "SGO1GKSzyE7IEPItTxCByw9x8FmnrCDexi9/cOUJOiI=",
        "fee": "2000",
        "fv": "6631154",
        "lv": "6632154",
        "snd": "LOXIQKHRCEDEMN5MKBQ32Y54J7H6JKBTEURQL4S65K44MTWN6UMTU2WNBM",
        "rcv": "LOXIQKHRCEDEMN5MKBQ32Y54J7H6JKBTEURQL4S65K44MTWN6UMTU2WNBM",
        "amnt": "0",
        "type": "pay"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

> 

Reviewer: Maybe it's worth adding a note explaining in plain English what this group is doing (e.g., "A payment of `X` USDC with abstracted fee").

    "paymentGroup": [
      {
        "signature": "VxpW6emWwct7ymzyXa/F2T7rwepM71XwsslPKEdpVqmbcRUB28QMdYJuuLkeP4dnVoI7emmxT6Q/YktqHc8xBg==",
        "txn": {
          "gen": "mainnet-v1.0",
          "gh": "SGO1GKSzyE7IEPItTxCByw9x8FmnrCDexi9/cOUJOiI=",
          "fee": "2000",
          "fv": "6631154",
          "lv": "6632154",
          "snd": "LOXIQKHRCEDEMN5MKBQ32Y54J7H6JKBTEURQL4S65K44MTWN6UMTU2WNBM",
          "rcv": "LOXIQKHRCEDEMN5MKBQ32Y54J7H6JKBTEURQL4S65K44MTWN6UMTU2WNBM",
          "amnt": "0",
          "type": "pay"
        }
      },
      {
        "signature": "wVGxbZwPd2c8zKX4RSE4muFRBOHe/nRq5VT6iMeMksi2agfOCTs+VzOGUPJ+bTT5T21EuYjoBKKDX2+/NZG8Cg==",
        "txn": {
          "gen": "mainnet-v1.0",
          "gh": "SGO1GKSzyE7IEPItTxCByw9x8FmnrCDexi9/cOUJOiI=",
          "asnd": "PPNHVQJGE6ZMEWPR35UHLUYMCCZV6VNTHLJMZDVCONXKUPV47K4WGQJWGI",
          "arcv": "ACTSMNPJPS5JMZJJ5G73JOXUUMWXXDGS7TMOER3M4W7BC54ERSZ4KPSMHM",
          "type": "axfer",
          "fee": "0",
          "fv": "6631154",
          "lv": "6632154",

>           "xaid": "168103"

Reviewer: Let's add the `aamt` field and use a "real" ASA ID (i.e., USDC).

        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

## Verification

Steps to verify a payment for the `exact` scheme on Algorand:

1. Verify the signature is valid for each transaction in the `paymentGroup`.
  a. Encode the `txn` parameters as described in the encoding section.
  b. Recover the public key of the sender from the `snd` or `asnd` field by decoding from the address.
  c. Verify the signature against the encoded message using the recovered public key.

> 2. Verify that the atomic group of transactions is valid and can be executed as a single unit.

Reviewer: Shouldn't we make clere here that the thing to verify is the `txn` with a ID corresponding to the `paymentTxID` specified in the payload?

Author: added the explanation now

3. Execute the payment group against an Algorand node's `simulate` endpoint to ensure the transactions would result in the amount specified in `paymentRequirements.maxAmountRequired` being transferred to the resource server's address.

## Settlement

> Once the group is validated by the resource server, settlement can occur by the facilitator submitting the `paymentGroup` to the Algorand network through the `v2/transactions` endpoint against any valid Algorand node.

Reviewer: It might be worth adding here that all that matters is verifying that the transaction with ID equal to `paymentTxID` is committed on the ledger (via Algod end-point).

In Algorand there are no consensus forks and so it achieves finality instantly a transaction is included in a block. So as soon as the transaction is included in a block, the payment is considered settled and the facilitator can inform the resource server of the successful payment and proceed with the resource delivery.

## Additional Considerations

> - In order for the resource server to receive payment on a particular Asset, it must be opted-in to that asset. In Algorand, accounts must explicitly signal they are okay with receiving a particular asset, otherwise an asset transfer to that account will be rejected. So as part of the resource server's setup, it should ensure it has opted-in to the asset ID specified in the `paymentRequirements.asset`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In order for the resource server to receive payment on a particular Asset, it **MUST** be opted-in to that asset.

In Algorand, accounts explicitly enable receiving a particular asset, otherwise an asset transfer to that account will be rejected. So as part of the resource server's setup, it **SHOULD** ensure it has opted-in to the asset ID specified in the `paymentRequirements.asset`.
```

# Scheme: `exact` on `Algorand`

## Summary

> The `exact` scheme on Algorand uses the `Algorand Standard Asset (ASA)`, which are native assets (no contract required) on the Algorand blockchain to authorize a transfer of a specific amount from the payer to the resource server. The approach results in the facilitator having no ability to direct funds anywhere but the address specified by the resource server in `paymentRequirements`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `exact` scheme on Algorand uses the Algorand Standard Asset (ASA), native assets (no contract required) of the Algorand protocol, to authorize a transfer of a specific amount from the payor to the resource server. The approach results in the facilitator having no ability to direct funds anywhere but the address specified by the resource server in `paymentRequirements`.
```

## Payment Requirements asset definition 

> In the `exact` scheme on Algorand, the `paymentRequirements.asset` **MUST** be a string representing an `Algorand Standard Asset (ASA)` ID unsigned integer instead of an `ERC20` contract address. This **MUST** be validated by the resource server to ensure the `asset` field is valid when using the Algorand scheme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the `exact` scheme on Algorand, the `paymentRequirements.asset` **MUST** be a string representing an ASA ID (64-bit unsigned integer) instead of an `ERC20` contract address. This **MUST** be validated by the resource server to ensure the `asset` field is valid when using the Algorand scheme.
```

## `X-Payment` header payload

> The `payload` field of the `X-PAYMENT` header **MUST** contain `paymentGroup` as a field. It represents an atomic group of transactions as an array. This is natively supported by Algorand and does not require contracts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `payload` field of the `X-PAYMENT` header **MUST** contain `paymentGroup` as a field. It represents an atomic group of transactions as an array. Transaction groups are natively supported by the Algorand protocol (no contract required), enabling the execution of several transactions (even with different authorizers) processed atomically (no partial execution is allowed, either all the transactions in the group succeed or the entire group is rejected).
```

> A group can have transactions of different types, such as, for example, `pay` (payment) and `axfer` (asset transfer). A group in Algorand can contain several different types of transactions. For more info, see the [Algorand documentation on transaction types](https://dev.algorand.co/concepts/transactions/reference/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A group can contain several different types of transactions, such as `pay` (transfer of ALGO native protocol asset) and `axfer` (transfer of generic ASA), and others (for further details on supported transaction types, refer to the [Algorand transactions documentation](https://dev.algorand.co/concepts/transactions/reference/).

> Single standalone transactions can be interpreted as a special group with a single transaction.
```

> As part of the payload there **MUST** also be a `paymentTxID` field which identifies the transaction in the group that will pay the resource server. The group may perform several operations to facilitate the payment, such as swaps or asset transfers, but only one transaction in the group will actually transfer the funds to the resource server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of the payload there **MUST** also be a `paymentTxID` field which identifies the transaction in the group that will pay the resource server. The group may perform several operations to facilitate the payment, such as swaps or asset transfers, but only one transaction in the group will actually transfer the funds to the resource server.

> In a single standalone transaction, the `paymentTxID` equals the only transaction ID.
```

> There can be multiple signers in the group and fees can be pooled together or assigned to a specific signer; meaning it can be delegated to a specific account to pay the fees for the group. A max of 16 transactions can be included in a group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multiple signers can be in the group, and fees can be pooled together or assigned to a specific signer, meaning they can be delegated to a specific account to pay the fees for the group. A group can include a maximum of:

- 16 _top-level transactions_, authorized either with a single signature (`Ed25519`), a `k-of-n` threshold multi-signature, or a logic signature;
- 256 _inner transactions_, authorized by an application (smart contract).

The `paymentTxID` **MUST** be one of a _top-level transaction_.
```

      }
    }
  ]
}
```

## Sequence of operations

```mermaid
  sequenceDiagram
    participant C as Client
    participant R as Resource Server
    participant F as Facilitator
    participant A as Algorand

    C->>R: Request Resource
    R-->>C: 402 Payment Required + paymentRequirements
    C->>C: Construct paymentGroup of transactions
    C->>C: Sign each transaction in paymentGroup
    C->>R: Resend request with X-PAYMENT header
    R->>F: Verify paymentGroup
    alt valid
      F-->>A: Simulate paymentGroup
      A-->>F: Simulation result
      alt simulation success
        F-->>R: Payment verified
        R->>F: Request settlement
        F-->>A: Submit paymentGroup
        A-->>F: Transaction result
        alt success - Instant Finality
          F-->>R: Settlement successful
          R-->>C: 200 OK + Resource
        else
          F-->>R: Settlement failed
          R-->>C: 402 Payment Required (invalid payment)
        end
      else simulation fail
        F-->>R: Payment invalid
        R-->>C: 402 Payment Required (invalid payment)
      end

    else invalid
      R-->>C: 402 Payment Required (invalid payment)
    end

```

## Signature Scheme

> Each transaction in the `paymentGroup` **MUST** be signed individually by each of the owners of the sender addresses in the group.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each _top-level transaction_ in the `paymentGroup` **MUST** be signed individually by each of the owners of the sender addresses in the group.
```

> In Algorand, signatures are based on the `Ed25519` signature scheme. The `signature` field in the `X-PAYMENT` header payload is a base64 encoded string of the signed transaction.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Algorand, signatures of _top-level transactions_ are based either on:

- A `Ed25519` single signature scheme (`sig`);
- A `k-of-n` threshold [multi-signature](https://dev.algorand.co/concepts/transactions/signing/#multisignatures) (`msig`);
- A [Logic Signature](https://dev.algorand.co/concepts/smart-contracts/logic-sigs/), verified by the Algorand Virtual Machine (`lsig`);

The `signature` field in the `X-PAYMENT` header payload is a base64 encoded string of the signed transaction.
```

### Algorand Addresses and Public Key relationship

> In Algorand, addresses are 58-character base32-encoded representations of public keys, with a sha512_256 checksum (last 4 bytes) appended as a suffix. This encoding ensures that addresses can be derived directly from public keys without requiring a pre-existing signature for operations like `ecRecover` to verify signatures.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Algorand, addresses are 58-character base32-encoded representations of either:

- Public keys, with a SHA-512/256 checksum (last 4 bytes) appended as a suffix. This encoding ensures that addresses can be derived directly from public keys without requiring a pre-existing signature for operations like `ecRecover` to verify signatures.
- Account controlled by a Logic Signature, derived as the SHA-512/256 hash of the Logic Signature bytecode prefixed by `Program`.
```

Author: For LSigs, the bytecode isn't the address but the SHA512_256 hash of it?

Reviewer: Yes, of course! My bad was an oversight; I'll edit the suggestion.

#### Example of encoding Algorand addresses:

```ts
	encodeAddress(publicKey: Buffer): string {
		const keyHash: string = sha512_256.create().update(publicKey).hex()

		// last 4 bytes of the hash
		const checksum: string = keyHash.slice(-8)

		return base32.encode(Encoder.ConcatArrays(publicKey, Buffer.from(checksum, "hex"))).slice(0, 58)
	}
```

### Encoding

#### Types

Before encoding, all `txn` parameters **MUST** be converted into primitive types:

> - `gh`: The genesis hash of the network, which is a base64 encoded string should be decoded. 
> - `snd`: The sender address should be decoded into its public key bytes.
> - `rcv`: The receiver address should be decoded into its public key bytes.
> - `xaid`: The asset ID should be converted into a uint64 integer.
> - `aamnt`: The amount to transfer should be converted into a uint64 integer.
> - `fee`: The fee for the transaction should be converted into a uint64 integer.
> - `fv`: The first valid round should be converted into a uint64 integer.
> - `lv`: The last valid round should be converted into a uint64 integer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Header Fields (common to any transaction type):

- `fee`: The fee for the transaction paid by the sender should be converted into a uint64 integer.
- `fv`: The first valid round of the transaction should be converted into a uint64 integer.
- `lv`: The last valid round of the transaction should be converted into a uint64 integer.
- `gh`: The genesis hash of the network, which is a base64 encoded string should be decoded. 
- `snd`: The sender address should be decoded into its public key bytes.
- `type`: The transaction type is a string.
- `grp`: Is the 32-bytes transaction group identifier.

ALGO Transfer fields (`pay`):
- `rcv`: The receiver address should be decoded into its public key bytes.
- `amt`: The amount of microALGO to transfer should be converted into a uint64 integer.

ASA transfer fields (`axfer`)
- `xaid`: The unique ASA ID should be converted into a uint64 integer.
- `aamnt`: The ASA amount to transfer should be converted into a uint64 integer.
- `arcv`: The ASA receiver address should be decoded into its public key bytes.
- `asnd`: The ASA sender address should be decoded into its public key bytes.

> The ASA sender (`asnd`) field should be set to the zero value for _regular_ ASA transfers between accounts. If this value is non-zero and different from the sender field (`snd`) in the header, the transaction is a _forced_ ASA transfer, where the _sender_ (`snd`) is the ASA’s _clawback address_ and the _asset sender_ (`asnd`) is the address from which the funds will be withdrawn.
```

#### Scheme

Algorand uses [**msgpack**](https://www.npmjs.com/package/algorand-msgpack) to encode the transaction before signing.

#### Steps to sign

- Decode the `txn` parameters as described above.
- Sort fields alphabetically. 
- Encode the sorted fields using msgpack.
- Add a prefix `TX` in its byte representation to the encoded message.

> - Sign the resulting byte array using the sender's private key with the `Ed25519` signature scheme.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Sign the resulting byte array using the sender's private key with the `Ed25519` signature scheme (or other signature options, such as multi-signature or logic-signature).
```

    "paymentGroup": [
      {
        "signature": "VxpW6emWwct7ymzyXa/F2T7rwepM71XwsslPKEdpVqmbcRUB28QMdYJuuLkeP4dnVoI7emmxT6Q/YktqHc8xBg==",
        "txn": {
          "gen": "mainnet-v1.0",
          "gh": "SGO1GKSzyE7IEPItTxCByw9x8FmnrCDexi9/cOUJOiI=",
          "fee": "2000",
          "fv": "6631154",
          "lv": "6632154",
          "snd": "LOXIQKHRCEDEMN5MKBQ32Y54J7H6JKBTEURQL4S65K44MTWN6UMTU2WNBM",
          "rcv": "LOXIQKHRCEDEMN5MKBQ32Y54J7H6JKBTEURQL4S65K44MTWN6UMTU2WNBM",
          "amnt": "0",
          "type": "pay"
        }
      },
      {
        "signature": "wVGxbZwPd2c8zKX4RSE4muFRBOHe/nRq5VT6iMeMksi2agfOCTs+VzOGUPJ+bTT5T21EuYjoBKKDX2+/NZG8Cg==",
        "txn": {
          "gen": "mainnet-v1.0",
          "gh": "SGO1GKSzyE7IEPItTxCByw9x8FmnrCDexi9/cOUJOiI=",
          "asnd": "PPNHVQJGE6ZMEWPR35UHLUYMCCZV6VNTHLJMZDVCONXKUPV47K4WGQJWGI",
          "arcv": "ACTSMNPJPS5JMZJJ5G73JOXUUMWXXDGS7TMOER3M4W7BC54ERSZ4KPSMHM",
          "aamt": "1000000",
          "type": "axfer",
          "fee": "0",
          "fv": "6631154",
          "lv": "6632154",
          "xaid": "31566704"
        }
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

> ## Verification

Reviewer: This process does not explain how to find the `paymentTxID` in the group (the `TxID` must be computed).

Author: The `PaymentTxID` is supplied as part of the header.

Author: Added explanation how to calculate it

Steps to verify a payment for the `exact` scheme on Algorand:

1. Verify the signature is valid for each transaction in the `paymentGroup`.
  a. Encode the `txn` parameters as described in the encoding section.

>   b. Recover the public key of the sender from the `snd` or `asnd` field by decoding from the address.

Reviewer: This is not always true if we use a multi-sig or a logic-sig.

Reviewer 2: `snd` should always the one signing, `asnd` is just _who_ the assets are coming from. But moreover we haven't considered rekeyed accounts here. The signature might be valid for the sender, but if the account has defined a different auth-addr, then it'd fail when it gets submitted to the network. I would probably suggest we reduce this section down to just step 3? Since the simulation endpoint can cover step 1 and 2 anyway?
```suggestion
  b. Recover the public key of the sender from the `snd` field by decoding from the address.
```

### Signature Scheme

Each _top-level transaction_ in the `paymentGroup` **MUST** be signed individually by each of the owners of the sender addresses in the group.

In Algorand, signatures of _top-level transactions_ are based either on:

- A `Ed25519` single signature scheme (`sig`);
- A `k-of-n` threshold [multi-signature](https://dev.algorand.co/concepts/transactions/signing/#multisignatures) (`msig`);
- A [Logic Signature](https://dev.algorand.co/concepts/smart-contracts/logic-sigs/), verified by the Algorand Virtual Machine (`lsig`);

### Algorand Addresses and Public Key relationship

In Algorand, addresses are 58-character base32-encoded representations of either:

- Public keys, with a sha512_256 checksum (last 4 bytes) appended as a suffix. This encoding ensures that addresses can be derived directly from public keys without requiring a pre-existing signature for operations like `ecRecover` to verify signatures.

> - SHA512_256 of the Logic Signatures program bytecode + `Program` as a prefix.

Reviewer 3: the checksum info being included in the public keys bullet implies that the logic sig addresses do not have checksum, which is false. We could move that part below, so that it clearly applies to all types of addresses.

Author: updated!

    ]
  }
}
```

## `X-Payment-Response` Header

Upon a successful settlement, the `X-PAYMENT-RESPONSE` **MUST** return the transaction ID of the `paymentGroup[paymentIndex]` transaction. This identifies the specific asset transfer transaction to the `payTo` address for the `maxAmountRequired`, and can be used to identify the transaction on the network.

Should the settlement fail, the transaction ID **SHOULD** be returned, but since failed transactions are not committed to the network, it might not be visible on the chain.

### Full `X-PAYMENT-RESPONSE` header example:

```json
{
  "success": true,
  "error": null,
  "txHash": "NTRZR6HGMMZGYMJKUNVNLKLA427ACAVIPFNC6JHA5XNBQQHW7MWA",
  "networkId": "algorand-mainnet"
}
```

## Verification

Steps to verify a payment for the `exact` scheme on Algorand:

1. Check the `paymentGroup` contains 16 or fewer elements.

> 1. Decode all transactions from the `paymentGrouop`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Decode all transactions from the `paymentGroup`.
```
